[Music]
whether you're a tricycle rider bicycle
rider rollerblader motorcycle racer
traveling at over 200 kilometers an hour
or just me trying to carry a really
heavy suitcase across a giant airport
wheels can make what you're doing easier
I don't think any tool has changed the
way people live more than the invention
of the simple machine called the wheel
and axle a wheel and axle is really
another type of lever the round wheel is
connected to a round post called the
axle turn the wheel and the axle goes
along for the ride and that means
anything resting on top of the axle gets
a ride to the wheel turns on the axle
the way the lever tilts on the fulcrum
yep if you look around you can see
examples of the wheel and axle
everywhere take something as simple as a
doorknob the knob is the wheel and the
post that goes through the door is the
axle when you turn the knob the post
turns easily it seems simple but try
turning the post without the knob
attached
[Music]
here's a great example of another simple
machine called a pulley
it helps me raise this heavy sail
without having to climb way up high to
do it a pulley is a special wheel with
cord wrapped around it when the Rope is
pulled the wheel can turn in either
direction by pulling on one end of the
rope you can lift an object on the other
end the neat thing is that each wheel of
a pulley makes the work easier
so with several wheels people can lift
things that they could never lift with
just their hands pulleys are even used
in giant cranes to lift very heavy loads
high in the air just think how hard it
would be to lift these huge containers
by hand pulleys can definitely make work
easier